The Project Gutenberg EBook of Wyndham Towers by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever You may copy it give it away or
reuse it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at wwwgutenbergorg


Title Wyndham Towers

Author Thomas Bailey Aldrich

Posting Date November 23 2008 EBook 1830
Release Date July 1998

Language English

Character set encoding ASCII

 START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WYNDHAM TOWERS 




Produced by Donald Lainson





WYNDHAM TOWERS

By Thomas Bailey Aldrich


TO EDWIN BOOTH

MY DEAR BOOTH

In offering these verses to you I beg you to treat them as you
have many a time advised a certain lord chamberlain to treat the
players not according to their desert Use them after your own
honor and dignity the less they deserve the more merit is in your
bounty

These many years your friend and comrade

T B ALDRICH




NOTE

The motif of the story embodied in the following poem was crudely
outlined in a brief sketch printed in an early collection of the
authors verse and subsequently cancelled for a purpose not until
now accomplished Wyndham Towers is not to be confused with this
discarded sketch the text of which has furnished only a phrase or
an indirect suggestion here and there That the writers method
when recasting the poem was more or less influenced by the poets
he had been studyingchiefly the dramatists of the Elizabethan
erawill he hopes be obvious It was part of his design
however far he may have fallen from it to give his narrative
something of the atmosphere and color of the period in which the
action takes place though the story is supposed to be told at a
later date




WYNDHAM TOWERS


 Before you reach the slender higharched bridge
 Like to a heron with one foot in stream
 The hamlet breaks upon you through green boughs
 A square stone church within a place of graves
 Upon the slope gray houses oddly grouped
 With plastered gables set with crossed oakbeams
 And roofs of yellow tile and purplish slate
 That is The Falcon with the swinging sign
 And rustic bench an ancient hostelry
 Those leaden lattices were hung on hinge
 In good Queen Besss time so old it is
 On ridgepiece gableend or dovecot vane
 A gilded weathercock at intervals
 Glimmersan angel on the wing most like
 Of local workmanship for since the reign
 Of pious Edward here have carvers thrived
 In saintsheads skillful and winged cherubim
 Meet for rich abbeys From yon crumbling tower
 Whose brickwork base the cunning Romans laid
 And now of no use else except to train
 The ivy of an idle legend on
 You see such lens is this thin Devon air
 If it so chance no fog comes rolling in
 The Torridge where its branching crystal spreads
 To join the Taw Hard by from a chalk cliff
 A torrent leaps not lovelier Sappho was
 Giving herself all silvery to the sea
 From that Leucadian rock Beneath your feet
 Lie sand and surf in curving parallels
 Off shore a buoy gleams like a dolphins back
 Dripping with brine and guards a sunken reef
 Whose sharp incisors have gnawed many a keel
 There frets the sea and turns white at the lip
 And in illweather lets the ledge show fang
 A very pleasant nook in Devon this

 Upon the height of old was Wyndham Towers
 Clinging to rock there like an eagles nest
 With moat and drawbridge once and good for siege
 Four towers it had to front the diverse winds
 Built God knows when all record being lost
 Locked in the memories of forgotten men
 In Caesars day a pagan temple next
 A monastery then a feudal hold
 Later a manor and at last a ruin
 Such knowledge have we of it vaguely caught
 Through whispers fallen from traditions lip
 This shattered tower with crenellated top
 And loops for archers alone marks the spot
 Looming forlornlya gigantic harp
 Whereon the invisible fingers of the wind
 Its fitful and mysterious dirges play

 Here dwelt in the last Tudors virgin reign
 One Richard Wyndham Knight and Gentleman
 The son of Rawdon slain near Calais wall
 When Bloody Mary lost her grip on France
 A lonely wight that no kith had nor kin
 Save one a brotherby illfortunes spite
 A brother since t were better to have none
 Of late not often seen at Wyndham Towers
 Where he in sooth but lenten welcome got
 When to that gate his errant footstep strayed
 Yet held he dear those gray majestic walls
 Timestained and crusted with the seas salt breath
 There first his eyes took color of the sea
 There did his heart stay when fate drove him thence
 And there at lastbut that we tell anon
 Darrell they named him for an ancestor
 Whose bones were whitening in Holy Land
 The other Richard a crusader name
 Yet it was Darrell had the lionheart
 No love and little liking served this pair
 In look and word unpaired as white and black
 Of once rich bough the last unlucky fruit
 The one for straightness like a Norland pine
 Set on some precipices perilous edge
 Intrepid handsome little past blown youth
 Of all pure thought and brave deed amorous
 Moulded the courts high atmosphere to breathe
 Yet liking well the camps more liberal air
 Poet soldier courtier t was the mode
 The otheras a glowworm to a star
 Suspicious morbid passionate selfinvolved
 The soul half eaten out with solitude
 Corroded like a swordblade left in sheath
 Asleep and lost to actionin a word
 A misanthrope a miser a soured man
 One fortune loved not and looked at askance
 Yet he a pleasant outward semblance had
 Say what you will and paint things as you may
 The devil is not black with horn and hoof
 As gossips picture him he is a person
 Quite scrupulous of doublet and demeanor
 As was this Master Wyndham of The Towers
 Now latterly in most unhappy case
 Because of matters to be here set forth

 A thing of not much moment as life goes
 A thing a man with some philosophy
 Had idly brushed aside as t were a gnat
 That winged itself between him and the light
 Had through the crooked working of his mind
 Brought Wyndham to a very grievous pass
 Yet t was a grapestone choked Anacreon
 And hushed his song There is no little thing
 In nature in a raindrops compass lie
 A planets elements This Wyndhams woe
 Was one Griselda daughter to a man
 Of Bideford a shipman once but since
 Turned soldier now in whitehaired wrinkled age
 Sitting beneath the olive valiant still
 With sword on nail above the chimneyshelf
 In case the Queen should need its edge again
 An officer he was though lowly born
 The man aforetime in the Netherlands
 And through those everfamous French campaigns
 Marry in what wars bore he not a hand
 In Rawdon Wyndhams troop of horse had served
 And when he fell that day by Calais wall
 Had from the Frenchmens pikes his body snatched
 And so much saved of him which was not much
 The good knight being dead For this deeds sake
 That did enlarge itself in sorrows eye
 The widow deemed all guerdon all too small
 And held her dear lords servant and his girl
 Born later when that clash of steel was done
 As her own kin till she herself was laid
 I the earth and sainted elsewhere The two sons
 Let cool the friendship one in foreign parts
 Did gold and honor seek at hall stayed one
 The heir and now of old friends negligent
 Thus fortune hardens the ignoble heart
 Griselda even as a little maid
 Demure but with more crotchets in the brain
 I warrant ye than minutes to the hour
 Had this one much misliked in her childthought
 Confused him somehow with those cruel shapes
 Of iron men that up there at The Towers
 Quickened her pulse For he was gaunt his face
 Mature beyond the logic of his years
 Had in it something sinister and grim
 Like to the visage pregnant fancy saw
 Behind the bars of each disused casque
 In that east chamber where the harness hung
 And dinted shields of Wyndhams gone to grace
 At Poitiers this one this at Agincourt
 That other on the sands of Palestine
 A breed of fierce manslayers sire and son
 Of these seemed Richard with his steel crossbow
 Killing the doves in very wantonness
 The gentle doves that to the ramparts came
 For scattered crumbs undreamful of all ill
 Each wellsent dart that stained a snowy breast
 Straight to her own whitebudding bosom went
 Fled were those summers now and she had passed
 Out of the childworld of vain fantasy
 Where many a rainbow castle lay in ruin
 But to her mind like winestain to a flask
 The old distrust still clung indelible
 Holding her in her maidhoods serious prime
 Well pleased from his cold eyes to move apart
 And in her humble fortunes dwell secure
 Indeed what was shea poor soldiers girl
 Merely a tenants daughter Times were changed
 And lifes bright web had sadder colors in t
 That most sweet gentle ladyrest her soul
 Shrunk to an epitaph beside her lords
 And six lines shorter which was all a shame
 Gaunt Richard heir that other at earths end
 The younger son that was her sweetheart once
 Fighting the Spaniards getting slain perchance
 And all dear oldtime uses quite forgot
 Slowly unnoted like the creeping rust
 That spreads insidious had estrangement come
 Until at last one knew not how it fell
 And little cared if sober truth were said
 She and the father no more climbed the hill
 To Twelfth Night festival or Mayday dance
 Nor commerce had with any at The Towers
 Yet in a formless misty sort of way
 The girl had place in Wyndhams mindthe girl
 Why yes beshrew him it was even she
 Whom his soft mother had made favorite of
 And wellnigh spoiled some dozen summers gone

 Perhaps because dull custom made her tame
 Or that she was not comely in the bud
 Her sweetness halting like a tardy May
 That wraps itself in mist and seems not fair
 For this or finer reason undivined
 His thought she touched not and was glad withal
 When she did note how others took his eye
 And wore rue after Thus was her white peace
 Undarkened till it so befell these two
 Meeting as they a hundred times had met
 On hillpath or at crossing of the weir
 Her beauty broke on him like some rare flower
 That was not yesterday Evn so the Spring
 Unclasps the girdle of its loveliness
 Abruptly in the North here long the drifts
 Linger in hollows long on bough and briar
 No slight leaf ventures lest the frosts keen tooth
 Nip it and then all suddenly the earth
 Is nought but scent and bloom So unto him
 Griseldas grace unclosed Where lagged his wit
 That guessed not of the bud that slept in stem
 Nor hint had of the flower within the bud
 If so much beauty had a tiger been
 T had eaten him In all the wavewashed length
 Of rocky Devon where was found her like
 For excellence of wedded red and white
 Here on that smooth and sunny field her cheek
 The hostile hues of Lancaster and York
 Did meet and blending make a heavenly truce
 This were indeed a rose a king might wear
 Upon his bosom By St Dunstan now
 Himself would wear it Then by seeming chance
 Crossed he her walks and stayed her with discourse
 Devised adroitly spoke of common things
 At firstof days when his good mother lived
 If t were to live to pass long dolorous hours
 Before his fathers effigy in church
 Of one who then used often come to hall
 Ever at Yuletide when the great log flamed
 In chimneyplace and laugh and jest went round
 And maidens strayed beneath the mistletoe
 Making believe not see it so got kissed
 Of one that joined not in the morricedance
 But in her seagreen kirtle stood at gaze
 A timid little creature that was scared
 By dead mens armor Nought there suffered change
 Those empty shells of valor grew not old
 Though something rusty Would they fright her now
 Looked she upon them Held she in her mind
 T was Spring and loud the mavis piped outside
 The day the Turkish helmet slipped from peg
 And clashing on the floor congealed her blood
 And sent both hands to terrorsmitten eyes
 She trembling ready to yield up the ghost
 Right merry was it Finally he touched
 On matters nearer things she had foreboded
 And this one time must needs lend hearing to
 And end so sorry business ere woe came
 Like a true maid and honest as she was
 So tutoring the tremble on her lip
 And holding back hot tears she gave reply
 With such discretion as straight tied his tongue
 Albeit he lacked not boldness in discourse

 Indeed indeed sir you speak but in jest
 Lightly not meaning it in courtierway
 I have heard said that ladies at the Court
 I judge them nothave most forgiving ears
 And list right willingly to idle words
 Listen and smile and never stain a cheek
 Yet not such words your fathers son should use
 With me my fathers daughter You forget
 What should most precious be to memorys heart
 Love that dared death and so farewell Farewell
 It was in sooth for after that one time
 Though he had fain with passionbreathed vows
 Besieged that marble citadel her breast
 He got no speech of her she chose her walks
 Let only moon and star look on the face
 That could well risk the candor of the sun
 Ran not to lattice at each sound of hoof
 By stream or hedgerow plucked no pansies more
 Mistrusting Proserpinas cruel fate
 Herself upgathered in Sicilian fields
 At chapelfor one needs to chapel go
 ASundayglanced not either right or left
 But with black eyelash wedded to white cheek
 Knelt there impassive like the marble girl
 That at the footend of his fathers tomb
 Inside the chancel where the Wyndhams lay
 Through the long years her icy vigil kept

 As leaves turn into flame at the frosts touch
 So Richards heart on coldness fed its fire
 And burned with surfeit of indifference
 All flavor and complexion of content
 Went out of life what served once served no more
 His hound and falcon ceased to pleasure him
 He readsome musty folios there were
 On shelfbut even in brave Froissarts page
 Where God knows there be wounds enough no herb
 Nor potion found he to purge sadness with
 The gray dust gathered on the leaf unturned
 And then the spider drew his thread across
 Certain bright coins that he was used to count
 With thrill at fingers ends uncounted lay
 Suddenly worthless like the conjurers gold
 That midst the jeers and laughter of the crowd
 Turns into ashes in the rustics hand
 Soft idleness itself bore now a thorn
 Twopronged with meditation and desire
 The cold Griselda that would none of him
 The fair Griselda Not alone by day
 With this most solid earth beneath his feet
 But in the weird and unsubstantial sphere
 Of slumber did her beauty hold him thrall
 Herself of late he saw not t was a wraith
 He worshipped a vain shadow Thus he pined
 From dawn to dusk and then from dusk to dawn
 Of that miraculous infection caught
 From anycolored eyes so they be sweet
 Strange that a man should let a maids slim foot
 Stamp on his happiness and quench it quite

 With what snailpace the traitor time creeps by
 When one is out with fortune and undone
 how tauntingly upon the dials plate
 The shadows finger points the dismal hour
 Thus Wyndham with hands clasped behind his back
 Watching the languid and reluctant sun
 Fade from the metal disk beside the door
 The hours hung heavy up there on the hill
 Where life was little various at best
 And merriment had long since taen its flight
 Sometimes he sat and conned the flying clouds
 Till on dusks bosom nestled her one star
 And spoke no word nor seemed alive at all
 But a mere shape and counterfeit of life
 Or urged by some swift hunger for green boughs
 Would bid the hound to heel and disappear
 Into the forest with himself communing
 For lack of gossip So do lonely men
 Make themselves tedious to their tedious selves
 Thus passed he once in a white blaze of noon
 Under his oaks and muttered as he went

 My fathers daughter and your fathers son
 Faith but it was a shrewd and nimble phrase
 And left me with no fitting word at tongue
 The wench hath wit and matter of her own
 And beauty that doth seldom mate with wit
 Nature hath painted her a proper brown
 A russetcolored wench that knows her worth
 And mincing tooshould have her ruff propt up
 With supertasses like a dame at Court
 And go in clothofgold Ill get a suit
 Of Genoa velvet and so take her eye
 Has she a heart The ladies of Whitehall
 Are not so skittish else does Darrell lie
 Most villainously Often hath he said
 The art of blushing s a lost art at Court
 If so good riddance This one here lets love
 Play beggar to her prudery and starve
 Feeding him ever on looks turned aside
 To be so young so fair and wise withal
 Lets love starve Nay I think starves merely me
 For when was ever woman logical
 Both day and nighttime Not since Adam fell
 I doubt a lover somewhere What shrewd bee
 Hath buzzed betimes about this clovertop
 Belike some scriveners clerk at Bideford
 With long goosequill and inkhorn at his thigh
 Methinks I see the parchment face of him
 Or one of those swashbuckler Devon lads
 That haunt the inn there with red Spanish gold
 Rank scurvy knaves ripe fruit for gallowstree
 Or else the sextons sonhere Wyndham laughed
 Though not a man of mirthindeed a man
 Of niggard humor but that sextons son
 Lean as the shadow cast by a church spire
 Eyes deep in the sockets noseless high cheekboned
 Like nothing in the circle of this earth
 But a deathshead that from a mural slab
 Within the chancel leers through sermontime
 Making a mock of poor mortality
 The fancy touched him and he laughed a laugh
 That from his noonday slumber roused an owl
 Snug in his oaken hermitage hard by
 A very rare conceitthe sextons son

 Not he forsooth he smacked of churchyard mould
 And musty odors of motheaten palls
 A living death a walking epitaph
 No lover that for tingling flesh and blood
 To rest soft cheek on and change kisses with
 Yet lover somewhere from his sly cocoon
 Time would unshell him In the interim
 What was to do but wait and mark who strolled
 Of evenings up the hillpath and made halt
 This side the coppice at a certain gate
 For by that chance which ever serves ill ends
 Within the slanted shadow of The Towers
 The maid Griselda dwelt Her gray scarred sire
 Had for cloth doublet changed the steel cuirass
 The sword for gardeners fork and so henceforth
 In the mild autumn and sundown of life
 Moving erect among his curves and squares
 Of lily rose and purple flowerdeluce
 Set none but harmless squadrons in the field
 Save now and then at tavern where he posed
 Tankard in hand and prattling of old days
 A whitemustached epitome of wars

 How runs the proverb touching him who waits
 Who waits shall have the world Times heir is he
 Be he but patient Thus the thing befell
 Wherefrom grew all this history of woe
 Haunting the grounds one night as his use was
 Who loved the dark as bats and owlets do
 Wyndham got sound of voices in the air
 That did such strange and goblin changes ring
 As left him doubtful whence the murmurs came
 Now here now there as they were winged things
 Such trick plays Echo upon hapless wight
 Chancecaught in lonely places where she dwells
 Anon a laugh rang out melodious
 Like the merles note when its ecstatic heart
 Is packed with summertime then all was still
 So still the soul of silence seemed to grieve
 The loss of that sweet laughter In his tracks
 The man stopped short and listened As he leaned
 And craned his neck and peered into the gloom
 And would the fabulous hundred eyes were his
 That Argus in the Grecian legend had
 He saw two figures moving through a drift
 Of moonlight that lay stretched across the lawn
 A mans tall shape a slim shape close at side
 Her palm in tender fashion pressed to his
 The woven snood about her shoulders fallen
 And from the sombre midnight of her hair
 An ardent face outlooking like a star
 As in a vision saw he this for straight
 They vanished Where those silvery shadows were
 Was nothing Had he dreamed it Had he gone
 Mad with much thinking on her and so made
 Ghosts of his own sick fancies Like a man
 Carved out of alabaster and set up
 Within a woodland he stood rooted there
 Glimmering wanly under pendent boughs
 Spellbound he stood in very woeful plight
 Bewildered and then presently with shock
 Of rapid pulses hammering at heart
 As mad besiegers hammer at a gate
 To life came back and turned on heel to fly
 From that accursed spot and all that was
 When once more the girls laugh made rich the night
 And melted and the silence grieved anew
 Like lead his feet were and he needs must halt
 Close upon this but further off a voice
 From somewhereEcho at her trick again
 Took up the rhyme of Sweetheart sigh no more


 It was with doubt and trembling
 I whispered in her ear
 Go take her answer birdonbough
 That all the world may hear
 Sweetheart sigh no more

 Sing it sing it tawny throat
 Upon the wayside tree
 How fair she is how true she is
 How dear she is to me
 Sweetheart sigh no more

 Sing it sing it tawny throat
 And through the summer long
 The winds among the clovertops
 And brooks for all their silvery stops
 Shall envy you the song
 Sweetheart sigh no more


 T is said the Malays have an arrow steeped
 In some strange drug whose subtile properties
 Are such that if the point but prick the skin
 Death stays there Like to that fell cruel shaft
 This slender rhyme was Through the purple dark
 Straight home it sped and into Wyndhams veins
 Its drop of sudden poison did distill
 Now no sound was save when a dry twig snapped
 And rustled softly down from branch to branch
 Or on its pebbly shoals the meagre brook
 Made intermittent murmur So t is he
 Thus Wyndham breathing thickly with his eyes
 Dilating in the darkness Darrellhe
 I set my springe for other game than this
 Of hare or rabbit dreamed I not of wolf
 His frequent visitations have of late
 Perplexed me now the riddle reads itself
 A proper man a very proper man
 A fellow that burns Trinidado leaf
 And sends smoke through his nostril like a flue
 A fop a hangeron of willing skirts
 A murrain on him Would Elizabeth
 In some mad freak had clapped him in the Tower
 Ay through the Traitors Gate Would he were dead
 Within the year what worthy men have died
 Persons of substance civic ornaments
 And here s this gilt courtbutterfly on wing
 O thou most potent lightning in the cloud
 Prick me this fellow from the face of earth
 I would the Moors had got him in Algiers
 What time he harried them on land and sea
 And done their will with scimitar or cord
 Or flame of fagot and so made an end
 Or that some shot from petronel or bow
 Had winged him in the folly of his flight
 Well had it been if the Inquisitors
 With rack and screw had laid black claw on him
 In days whose chronicle is writ in blood
 The richest ever flowed in English veins
 Some foul mischance in this sort might have been
 For at dark Fortunes feet had Darrell flung
 In his youths flower a daring gauntlet down

 A beardless stripling at that solemn hour
 When breaking its frail filaments of clay
 The mothers spirit soared invisible
 The younger son unhoused as well he knew
 Had taken horse by night to London town
 With right sore heart and nought else in his scrip
 But boyish hope to footing find at Court
 A pages place belike with some great lord
 Or some small lord that other proving shy
 Of merit that had not yet clipt its shell
 Day after day in weather foul or fair
 With lackeys hucksters and the commoner sort
 At Whitehall and Westminster he stood guard
 Reading mens faces with most anxious eye
 There the lords swarmed some waspish and some bland
 But none would pause at plucking of the sleeve
 To hearken to him and the lad had died
 On London stones for lack of crust to gnaw
 But that he caught the ages malady
 The something magical that was in air
 And made men poets heroes demigods
 Made Shakespeare Rawleigh Grenvile Oxenham
 And set them stars in the forefront of Time
 In fine young Darrell drew of that same air
 A valiant breath and shipped with Francis Drake
 Of Tavistock to sail the Spanish seas
 And teach the heathen manners with Gods aid
 And so among lean Papists and black Moors
 He with the din of battle in his ears
 Struck fortune Who would tamely bide at home
 At beck and call of some proud swollen lord
 Not worth his biscuit or at Beautys feet
 Sit making sonnets when was work to do
 Out yonder sinking Philips caravels
 At sea and then by way of episode
 Setting quick torch to piratenests ashore


  Sir Francis Drake called this singeing the
 King of Spaynes beard


 Brave sport to singe the beard o the King of Spain
 Brave sport but in the end dreamed he of home
 Of where the troutbrook lisped among the reeds
 Of great chalk cliffs and leagues of yellow gorse
 Of peaceful lanes of Londons roaring streets
 The crowds the shops the pageants in Cheapside
 And heard the trumpets blaring for the Queen
 When t was the wind that whistled in the shrouds
 Off Cadiz Ah and softer dreams he had
 Of an unnamed and sweetest mystery
 And from the marble of his souls desire
 Hewed out the white ideal of his love
 A new Pygmalion All things drew him home
 This mainly Foot on English earth once more
 Dear earth of England his propitious fame
 A thorn in none but crooked Envys side
 He went crossgartered with a silken rose
 At golden lovelock diamond brooch at hat
 Looping one side up very gallantly
 And changed his doublets color twice a day
 Ill fare had given his softer senses edge
 Good fortune later bade him come to dine
 Mild Spensers scholar Philip Sidneys friend
 So took he now his ease in Devonshire
 When Town was dull or he had need at heart
 For sight of Wyndham Towers against the sky
 But chiefly did he bask him by the Thames
 For there t was that Young England froze and thawed
 By turns in GLORIANAS frown and smile

 As some wild animal that gets a wound
 And prescience hath of death will drag itself
 Back to its cavern sullenly to die
 And would not have heavens airs for witnesses
 So Wyndham shrinking from the very stars
 And telltale places where the moonlight fell
 Crept through the huddled shadows back to hall
 And in a lonely room where no light was
 Save what the moon made at the casement there
 Sat pondering his hurt and in the dark
 Gave audience to a host of grievances
 For never comes reflection gay or grave
 But it brings with it comrades of its hue
 So did he fall to thinking how his day
 Declined and how his narrow life had run
 Obscurely through an age of great events
 Such as men never saw nor will again
 Until the globe be riven by Gods fire
 Others had ventured for the Golden Fleece
 Knaves of no parts at all and got renown
 By force of circumstance and not desert
 While he up there on that rockbastioned coast
 Had rotted like some old hulks skeleton
 Whose naked and bleached ribs the lazy tide
 Laps day by day and no man thinks of more
 Then was jade Fortune in her lavish mood
 Why had he not for distant Colchis sailed
 And been the Jason of these Argonauts
 True some had come to block on Tower Hill
 Or quittance made in a less noble sort
 Still they had lived from lifes highmantling cup
 Had blown the bead In such case if ones head
 Be of its momentary laurel stripped
 And made a show of stuck on Temple Bar
 Or at the Southwark end of London Bridge
 What mattered it At worst man dies but once
 So far as known One may not master death
 But life should be ones lackey He had been
 Times dupe and bondsman ever since his birth
 Had walked this planet with his eye oblique
 Grasped what was worthless what were most dear missed
 Missed love and fame and all the sum of things
 Fame gets a man in Englandthe Queens smile
 Which means when she s in humor abbeylands
 Appointments stars and ribbons for the breast
 And that sleek adulation that takes shape
 I the downdrooping of obsequious lids
 When one ascends a stair or walks the pave
 Good Lord but it was excellent to see
 How Expectation in the anteroom
 Crooks back to Greatness passing to the Queen
 Kind sir Sweet sir I prithee speed my suit
 T was somewhat to be flattered though by fools
 For even a fools coin hath a kind of ring
 Yet after allthus did the grapes turn sour
 To master Fox in fablewho would care
 To moil and toil to gain a little fame
 And have each rascal that prowls under heaven
 Stab one for getting it Had he wished power
 The thing was in the marketplace for sale
 At stated ratesso much for a mans soul
 His was a haughty spirit that bent not
 And one to rise had need to cringe and creep
 So had his brother into favor crawled
 Like slug into the bosom of a rose
 And battened in the sun At thought of him
 Forgotten for a moment Wyndham winced
 And felt his wound Why bides he not in Town
 With his blond lovelock and wenchluring ways
 There runs his fox What foul fiend sends him here
 To Wyndham Towers Is there not space enough
 In this our England he needs crowd me so
 Has London sack upon his palate staled
 That he must come to sip my Devon cream
 Are all maids shut in nunneries save this one
 What magic philtre hath he given her
 To thaw the ice that melted not for me
 Rich is he now that at his setting forth
 Had not two silver pieces to his purse
 It is his brave apparel dazzles her
 Thus puts he bound and barrier to my love
 Another man were he abused as I
 Ill have no more of him If I but dared
 Nay I dare not I have fawns blood I think
 I would and dare not Thrice the hooded clock
 Solemnly like some old Carthusian monk
 With meagre face half seen beneath his cowl
 Intoned the quarter Memory went not back
 When this was not a most familiar sound
 Yet as each stroke on the dead silence fell
 Wyndham turned startled Now the sanguine moon
 To clouded opal changing momently
 Rose sheer above the pinetrees ragged edge
 And through the wideflung casement reaching hand
 With cold and spectral finger touched the plates
 Of his dead fathers armor till it gleamed
 One mass of silver There it stood complete
 That august panoply which once struck dread
 To foemen on the sunny plains of France
 Menacing terrible this instant stood
 With vizard down and joustinglance at charge
 As if that crumbled knight were quick within

 A footfall on the shingle walk below
 Grated a footfall light as Mercurys
 Disdaining earth and Wyndham in the dark
 Half crouched upon the settle with his nails
 Indenting the soft woodwork held his breath
 Then suddenly a blind rage like a flame
 Swept over him and hurled him to his feet
 Such rage as must have seized the soul of Cain
 Meeting his brother in the stubblefield
 Anon came one that hummed a blithe seasong
 As he were fresh from tavern and brave cheer
 And held the stars that blinked there in the blue
 Boon comrades Singing in highhearted way
 His trueloves kiss a memory on his lip
 Straight on he came to unrenowned end
 Whose dream had been in good chainmail to die
 On some wellfoughten field at set of sun
 With glorious peal of trumpets on his ear
 Proclaiming victory So had he dreamed
 And there within an arch at the stairtop
 And screened behind a painted hangingcloth
 Of coiled gold serpents ready to make spring
 Ignoble Death stood his convulsive hand
 Grasping a rapier partway down the blade
 To deal the blow with deadlyjewelled hilt
 Black Death turned white with horror of himself
 Straight on came he that sang the blithe seasong
 And now his step was on the stair and now
 He neared the blazoned hangingcloth and now

 The lights were out and all life lay in trance
 On floor or pallet blanketed to chin
 Each in his mask of sullenseeming death
 Fond souls that recked not what was in the air
 Else had the dead mans scabbard as it clashed
 Against the balustrade then on the tiles
 Brought awkward witness One base hind there was
 Had stolen a venisonpasty on the shelf
 And now did penance him the fall half roused
 From dreadful nightmare once he turned and gasped
 Then straightway snored again No other sound
 Within the dreamenchanted house was heard
 Save that the mastiff lying at the gate
 With visionary bone snarled in his sleep
 Secret as bridalkiss may murder be

 Done was the deed that could not be undone
 Throughout eternity O silent tongue
 That would blab all with silence What to do
 How hide this speechless witness from mens gaze
 Living that body vexed us being dead
 T is like to give us trouble and to spare
 O for a cavern in deepbowelled earth
 Quick ere the dusky petals of the night
 Unclosing bare the fiery heart of dawn
 And thus undo us with its garish light
 Let us this mute and pale accusing clay
 In some undreamedof sepulchre bestow
 But where Hold back thy fleetwingd coursers Time
 Whilst we bethink us Ahsuch place there is
 Close too at handa place wherein a man
 Might lie till doomsday safer from the touch
 Of prying clown than is the spiced dust
 Of an Egyptian in his pyramid

 At a dark alcoves end of that long hall
 The ancient armorroom in the east wing
 A certain door whereof no mortal knew
 save Wyndham now that other lay acold
 Was to the panels of the wall so set
 And with such devilish shrewdness overlaid
 By carvings of wildflower and curled grapeleaf
 That one not in the favor of the trick
 Albeit he knew such mechanism was
 Ere he put finger on the secret spring
 Had need of Job for ancestor in faith
 You pressed a rose a least suspected rose
 And two doors turned on hinge the inner door
 Closing a space of say some six feet square
 Unlighted sheathed with iron Doubtless here
 The mediaeval Wyndhams hid their plate
 When things looked wicked from the outer wall
 Or on occasion a grim ruthless lord
 Immured some inconvenient twofaced friend
 To banquet bidden and kept over night
 Such pranks were played in Merrie England then
 Sealed in the narrow compass of that cell
 Shut from Gods light and his most precious air
 A man might have of life a halfhours lease
 If he were hale and wellbreathed at the start

 Hither did Richard bear his brothers corse
 And fling it down Upon the stonepaved floor
 In a thin strip of moonlight flung it down
 And then drew breath Perhaps he paused to glance
 At the white face there with the strange halfsmile
 Outliving death the brightness of the hair
 Lying in loops and tangles round the brow
 A seraphs face of silver set in gold
 Such as the deft Italians know to carve
 Perhaps his tigers blood cooled then perhaps
 Swift pity at his very heartstrings tugged
 And he in that black moment of remorse
 Seeing how there his nobler self lay slain
 Had bartered all this jewelstudded earth
 To win lifes color back to that wan cheek
 Ah let us hope it and some mercy feel
 Since each at compt shall need of mercy have
 Now how it happened whether t was the wind
 Or whether t was some incorporeal hand
 That reached down through the dark and did the thing
 Man knoweth not but suddenly both doors
 Ere one could utter cry or put forth arm
 Closed with dull clang and there in his own trap
 Incontinent was redstained Richard caught
 And as by flash of lightning saw his doom
 Call an thou wilt but every ear is stuffed
 With slumber Shriek and run quick frenzied hands
 Along the iron sheathing of thy grave
 For t is thy graveno egress shalt thou find
 No lock to break no subtilesliding bolt
 No careless rivet no half loosened plate
 For daggers point to fret at and pry off
 And let a stifling mortal get to air

 Angels of Light what were a thousand years
 Of rankling envy and contemned love
 And all the bitter draughts a man may drink
 To that half hour of Richards with his Dead

 Through silence gloom and starstrown paths of Night
 The breathless hours like phantoms stole away
 Black lay the earth in primal blackness wrapt
 Ere the great miracle once more was wrought
 A chill wind freshened in the pallid East
 And brought seasmell of newly blossomed foam
 And stirred the leaves and branchhung nests of birds
 Fainter the glowworms lantern glimmered now
 In the marsh land and on the forests hem
 And the slow dawn with purple laced the sky
 Where sky and sea lay sharply edge to edge
 The purple melted changed to violet
 And that to every delicate seashell tinge
 Blushpink deep cinnabar then no change was
 Save that the air had in it sense of wings
 Till suddenly the heavens were all aflame
 And it was morning O great miracle
 O radiance and splendor of the Throne
 Daily vouchsafed to us Yet saith the fool
 There is no God And now a level gleam
 Thrust like a spearhead through the tangled boughs
 Smote Wyndhams turrets and the spell was broke

 And one by one on pallet stretched or floor
 The sleepers wakened each took up afresh
 His load of life but two there were woke not
 Nor knew t was daybreak From the rusty nail
 The gateman snatched his bunch of ancient keys
 And yawning vowed the sun an hour too soon
 The scullion with face shining like his pans
 Hose down at heel and jerkin half unlaced
 On hearthstone knelt to coax the smouldering log
 The keeper fetched the yelping hounds their meat
 The hostler whistled in the stalls anon
 With rustling skirt and slumberfreshened cheek
 The kerchiefd housemaid tripped from room to room
 Sweet Gillian she that broke the groom his heart
 While wroth within behind a highbacked chair
 The withered butler for his master waited
 Cursing the cook That day the brewis spoiled

 That day came neither kinsman to break bread
 When it was seen that both had lain abroad
 The wolfskins of their couches made that plain
 As pikestaff or the mole on Gillians cheek
 The servants stared Some journey called them hence
 At dead of night some messenger had come
 Of secret import may be from the Queen
 And they paused not for change of raiment even
 And yet in faith that were but little like
 Sir Richard had scant dealings with the Court
 Stillif Northumberland were in arms again
 T was passing strange No beast had gone from rack
 How had they gone then Who looked on them last
 Up rose the withered butler he it was
 They supped together of no journey spoke
 Spoke little t was their custom after meal
 The masters brother sallied forth alone
 The master stayed within That did he not
 Quoth one I saw Sir Richard in the close
 I the moonrise T was eleven on the stroke
 Said Gillian softly he or t was his ghost
 Methought his face was whiter than my smock
 Passed through the courtyard and so into house
 Yet slept he not there And that other one
 The guest unwelcome kinsman little loved
 How these shrewd varlets turn us inside out
 At kitchenconclaves over our own wine
 Him had no eye seen since he issued forth
 As curfew sounded Call me lying knave
 He of the venisonpasty had the word
 And let me nevermore dip beak in ale
 Or sit at trencher with good smoking meat
 If I heard not in middle of the night
 The cock crow thrice and took it for a sign
 So marry t wasthat thou wert drunk again
 But no one laughed save he that made the jest
 Which often happens The long hours wore on
 And gloaming fell Then came another day
 And then another until seven dawns
 In Times slow crucible ran ruddy gold
 And overflowed the gray horizons edge
 And yet no hosts at tablean ill thing
 And now t was on the eve of Michaelmas

 What could it mean From out their lethargy
 At last awaking searchers in hot haste
 Some in the saddle some afoot with hounds
 Scoured moor and woodland dragged the neighboring weirs
 And salmonstreams and watched the wily hawk
 Slip from his azure ambush overhead
 With ever a keen eye for carrion
 But no man found nor aught that once was man
 By land they went not went they waterways
 Might be from Bideford or Ilfracombe
 Mayhap they were in London who could tell
 God help us do men melt into the air
 Yet one there was whose dumb unlanguaged love
 Had all revealed had they but given heed
 Across the threshold of the armorroom
 The savage mastiff stretched himself and starved

 Now where lags he upon what alehouse bench
 Twixt here and London who shall lift this weight
 Were he not slain upon the Queens highway
 Ere he reached Town or tumbled into ford
 With too much sackandsugar under belt
 Then was his face set homeward this same hour
 Why lingers he Ill news t is said flies fast
 And good news creeps then his must needs be good
 That lets the tortoise pass him on the road
 Ride Dawkins ride by flashing tarn and fen
 And haunted hollow Look not where in chains
 On Hounslow heath the malefactor hangs
 A lasting terror Give thy roan jade spur
 And spare her not All Devon waits for thee
 Thou for the moment most important man
 A sevennight later when the rider sent
 To Town drew rein before The Falcon inn
 Under the creaking of the windy sign
 And slipped from saddle with most valorous call
 For beer to wash his throat out then confessed
 He brought no scrap of any honest news
 The last hope died and so the quest was done
 They fard afoot quoth one but where God wot

 The blackthorn bloomed anew and the long grass
 Was starred with flowers that once Griselda prized
 But plucked not She poor wench from moon to moon
 Waxed pale and paler of no known disease
 The villageleech averred with lips pursed out
 And cane at chin some inward fire he thought
 Consumed A dark inexplicable blight
 Had touched her thinned her till of that sweet earth
 Scarce more was left than would have served to grow
 A lily Later at a freshturned grave
 From out the maiden strewments as it were
 A whisper rose of most pathetic breath
 Of how one maid had been by two men loved
 No names Gods mercyand that neither man
 Would wed her whyconjecture faltered there
 For whiter was she than newdrifted snow
 Or bleached lambs wool or any purest thing
 Such stuff in sooth as Heaven shapes angels of
 And how from their warm comfortable beds
 These two men wandered out into the night
 Sore stricken and distempered in their mind
 And being by Satan blinded and urged on
 Did fling them headlong from a certain crag
 That up Clovelly way oerhangs the sea
 Oerhangs the sea to tempt unhappy folk
 From door to door the piteous legend passed
 And like a thrifty beggar took from each
 And when the long autumnal season came
 To that bleak bitter coast and when at night
 The deep was shaken and the pent cloud broke
 Crashing among the lurid hills of heaven
 And in brief sudden swoonings of the gale
 Contentious voices rose from the sanddunes
 Then to low sobs and murmurs died away
 The fishwives with their lean and sallow cheeks
 Lit by the flickering driftwoods ruddy glow
 Drew closer to the crane and under breath
 To awestruck maidens told the fearful tale

 The red leaf withered and the green leaf grew
 T was said that once the Queen reached out her hand
 This was at Richmond in her palace there
 And let it rest on Burleighs velvet sleeve
 And spokeright stately was she in her rouge
 Prithee good Master Cecil tell us now
 Was t ever known what ill befell those men
 Those Wyndhams Were they never never found
 Look you t will be three years come Michaelmas
 T were well to have at least the bones of them
 Fore God sir this is something should be seen
 When the Armada which God smote and sunk
 Threatened our Realm our buckler and our shield
 Were such stout hearts as that young Wyndham was
 The elder brotherwell Heaven fashioned him
 Our subjects are our subjects mark you that
 Not found forsooth Why then they should be found
 Fain had my good Lord Burleigh solved the thing
 And smoothed that ominous wrinkle on the brow
 Of her Most Sweet Imperious Majesty
 Full many a problem his statecraft had solved
 How strangle treason how soothe turbulent peers
 How foil the Pope and Spain how pay the Fleet
 Mere temporal matters but this business smelt
 Strongly of brimstone Bring back vanished folk
 That could not Master Cecil an he would

 The red leaf withered and the green leaf grew
 Dark were the days that came to Wyndham Towers
 With that grim secret rusting in its heart
 On the seas side along the fissured wall
 The lichen spread in patches of dull gold
 Up to the battlements at times assailed
 By sheeted ghosts of mist blown from the sea
 Now by the whistling arrows of the sleet
 Pelted and thrice of lightning scorched and seamed
 But stoutly held from dreary year to year
 By legions of most venerable rooks
 Shrill blackrobed prelates of the fighting sort
 In the wide moat run dry with summer droughts
 Great scarlet poppies lay in drifts and heaps
 Like bodies falln there in some vain assault
 Within decay and dolor had their court
 Dolor decay and silence lords of all
 From room to room the wind went shuddering
 On some vague endless quest now pausing here
 To lift an arras and then hurrying on
 To some fresh clue belike The sharpnosed mouse
 Through joist and floor discreetly gnawed her way
 And for her glossy young a lodging made
 In a cracked corselet that once held a heart
 The meditative spider undisturbed
 Wove his gray tapestry from sill to sill
 Over the transom the stone eagle drooped
 With one wing gone in most dejected state
 Moulting his feathers A blue poisonous vine
 Whose lucent berry hard as Indian jade
 No squirrel tried his tooth on June by June
 On the south hillslope festered in the sun
 Mans foot came not there It was haunted ground

 The red leaf withered and the green leaf grew
 An oak stood where an acorn tumbled once
 Ages ago and all the world was strange
 Now in that year King Charles the Second left
 Forever the soft arms of Mistress Gwynn
 And wrapt him in that marble where he lies
 The moulderd pile with its entombed Crime
 Passed to the keep of a brave newfledged lord
 Who liking much the sane and wholesome air
 That bent the boughs and fanned the turrets top
 Cried Here dwell I So fell it on a day
 The stroke of mallets and the screech of saws
 In those bleak chambers made such din as stopped
 The careful spider halfway up his thread
 And panic sent to myriad furtive things
 That dwelt in wainscots and loved not the sun
 Vainly in broken phalanx clamorous
 Did the scared rooks protest and all in vain
 The moths on indolent white damask wings
 At door and casement rallied Wyndham Towers
 Should have a bride and ghosts had word to quit

 And now behold what strange thing came to pass
 A certain workman in the eastern wing
 Plying his craft alone as the day waned
 One Gregory Nokes a very honest soul
 By trade woodcarverstumbled on a door
 Leading to nowhere at an alcoves end
 A double door that of itself swung back
 In such strange way as no man ever saw
 And there within a closet on the flags
 Were two grim shapes which vaguely seen at first
 In the half light grew presently distinct
 Two gnomes or vampires seemed they or dire imps
 Straight from the Pit in guise fantastical
 Of hose and doublet one stretched out full length
 Supine and one in terrorstricken sort
 Half toppled forward on the bended knee
 Grasping with viselike grip the others wrist
 As who should say Arouse thee sleep no more
 But said it not If they were quick or dead
 No sign they gave beyond this sad dumb show
 Blurred one face was yet luminous like the moon
 Caught in the fleecy network of a cloud
 Or seen glassed on the surface of a tarn
 When the wind crinkles it and makes all dim
 The other drawn and wrenched by mortal throes
 And in the aspect such beseeching look
 As might befall some poor wretch called to compt
 On the sudden even as he kneels at prayer
 With Mercy turned to frost upon the lip

 Thus much saw Nokes within the closet there
 Ere he drew breath then backing step by step
 The chisel clutched in still uplifted hand
 His eyes still fixed upon the ghosts he reached
 An open window giving on the court
 Where the stonecutters were to them he called
 Softly in whispers under his curved palm
 Lest peradventure a loud word should rouse
 The phantoms but ere foot could climb the stair
 Or the hearts pulses count the sum of ten
 Through both dread shapes as at Gods fingertouch
 A shiver ran the wavering outlines broke
 And suddenly a chill and mistlike breath
 Touched Nokess cheek as he at casement leaned
 And nought was left of that most piteous pair
 Save two long rapiers of some foreign make
 Lying there crossed a mass of flaky rust

 O luckless carver of dead images
 Saintshead or gargoyle thou hast seen a sight
 Shall last thee to the confines of the grave
 Ill were thy stars or ever thou wert born
 That thou shouldst look upon a thing forbid
 Now in thine eye shall it forever live
 And the waste solitudes of night inhabit
 With direful shadows of the nether world
 Yet leave thee lonely in the throng of men
 Not of them thou but creature set apart
 Under a ban and doomed henceforth to know
 The wise mans scorn the dull mans sorry jest
 For who could credence give to that mad tale
 Of churchyard folk appearing in broad day
 And drifting out at casement like a mist
 Marry not they who crowded up the stair
 In haste and peered into that empty cell
 And had half mind to buffet Master Nokes
 Standing with finger laid across his palm
 In argumentative appealing way
 Distraught of countenance most woebegone
 Seethe two swords As I m a Christian soul
 Odds man cried one thou st been adreamin man
 Cleave to thy beer an let strong drink alone

 So runs the legend So from their long sleep
 Those ghosts arose and fled into the night
 But never bride came to that dark abode
 For wild flames swept it ere a month was gone
 And nothing spared but that forlorn old tower
 Whereon the invisible fingers of the wind
 Its fitful and mysterious dirges play





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Wyndham Towers by Thomas Bailey Aldrich

 END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK WYNDHAM TOWERS 

 This file should be named 1830txt or 1830zip 
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in
 httpwwwgutenbergorg1831830

Produced by Donald Lainson

Updated editions will replace the previous onethe old editions
will be renamed

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works so the Foundation
and you can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties Special rules
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenbergtm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERGtm concept and trademark Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks unless you receive specific permission If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook complying with the
rules is very easy You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works reports performances and
research They may be modified and printed and given awayyou may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license especially commercial
redistribution



 START FULL LICENSE 

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenbergtm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works by using or distributing this work
or any other work associated in any way with the phrase Project
Gutenberg you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenbergtm License available with this file or online at
httpgutenbergorglicense


Section 1 General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenbergtm
electronic works

1A By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenbergtm
electronic work you indicate that you have read understand agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
trademarkcopyright agreement If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works in your possession
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenbergtm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1E8

1B Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenbergtm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement See
paragraph 1C below There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenbergtm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenbergtm electronic
works See paragraph 1E below

1C The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation the Foundation
or PGLAF owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenbergtm electronic works Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying distributing performing displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed Of course we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenbergtm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenbergtm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenbergtm name associated with
the work You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenbergtm License when you share it without charge with others

1D The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change If you are outside the United States check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading copying displaying performing distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenbergtm work The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States

1E Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg

1E1 The following sentence with active links to or other immediate
access to the full Project Gutenbergtm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenbergtm work any work on which the
phrase Project Gutenberg appears or with which the phrase Project
Gutenberg is associated is accessed displayed performed viewed
copied or distributed

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever You may copy it give it away or
reuse it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at wwwgutenbergorg

1E2 If an individual Project Gutenbergtm electronic work is derived
from the public domain does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase Project Gutenberg associated with or appearing on the
work you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1E1
through 1E7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenbergtm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1E8 or
1E9

1E3 If an individual Project Gutenbergtm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1E1 through 1E7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenbergtm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work

1E4 Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenbergtm
License terms from this work or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenbergtm

1E5 Do not copy display perform distribute or redistribute this
electronic work or any part of this electronic work without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1E1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenbergtm License

1E6 You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary
compressed marked up nonproprietary or proprietary form including any
word processing or hypertext form However if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenbergtm work in a format other than
Plain Vanilla ASCII or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenbergtm web site wwwgutenbergorg
you must at no additional cost fee or expense to the user provide a
copy a means of exporting a copy or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request of the work in its original Plain Vanilla ASCII or other
form Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenbergtm
License as specified in paragraph 1E1

1E7 Do not charge a fee for access to viewing displaying
performing copying or distributing any Project Gutenbergtm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1E8 or 1E9

1E8 You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenbergtm electronic works provided
that

 You pay a royalty fee of 20 of the gross profits you derive from
 the use of Project Gutenbergtm works calculated using the method
 you already use to calculate your applicable taxes The fee is
 owed to the owner of the Project Gutenbergtm trademark but he
 has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
 Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation Royalty payments
 must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
 prepare or are legally required to prepare your periodic tax
 returns Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
 sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
 address specified in Section 4 Information about donations to
 the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

 You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
 you in writing or by email within 30 days of receipt that she
 does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenbergtm
 License You must require such a user to return or
 destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
 and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
 Project Gutenbergtm works

 You provide in accordance with paragraph 1F3 a full refund of any
 money paid for a work or a replacement copy if a defect in the
 electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
 of receipt of the work

 You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
 distribution of Project Gutenbergtm works

1E9 If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenbergtm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart the owner of the Project Gutenbergtm trademark Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below

1F

1F1 Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify do copyright research on transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenbergtm
collection Despite these efforts Project Gutenbergtm electronic
works and the medium on which they may be stored may contain
Defects such as but not limited to incomplete inaccurate or
corrupt data transcription errors a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement a defective or damaged disk or other medium a
computer virus or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment

1F2 LIMITED WARRANTY DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES  Except for the Right
of Replacement or Refund described in paragraph 1F3 the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation the owner of the Project
Gutenbergtm trademark and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenbergtm electronic work under this agreement disclaim all
liability to you for damages costs and expenses including legal
fees YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE STRICT
LIABILITY BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3 YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION THE
TRADEMARK OWNER AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL DIRECT INDIRECT CONSEQUENTIAL PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE

1F3 LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND  If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it you can
receive a refund of the money if any you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from If you
received the work on a physical medium you must return the medium with
your written explanation The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund If you received the work electronically the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund If the second copy
is also defective you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem

1F4 Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1F3 this work is provided to you ASIS WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND EXPRESS OR IMPLIED INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE

1F5 Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions

1F6 INDEMNITY  You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation the
trademark owner any agent or employee of the Foundation anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement and any volunteers associated with the production
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenbergtm electronic works
harmless from all liability costs and expenses including legal fees
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur a distribution of this or any Project Gutenbergtm
work b alteration modification or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenbergtm work and c any Defect you cause


Section 2 Information about the Mission of Project Gutenbergtm

Project Gutenbergtm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete old middleaged and new computers It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need is critical to reaching Project Gutenbergtms
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenbergtm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come In 2001 the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenbergtm and future generations
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at httpwwwpglaforg


Section 3 Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501c3 educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service The Foundations EIN or federal tax identification
number is 646221541 Its 501c3 letter is posted at
httppglaforgfundraising Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by US federal laws and your states laws

The Foundations principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr S
Fairbanks AK 99712 but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West Salt Lake City UT 84116 801 5961887 email
businesspglaforg Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundations web site and official
page at httppglaforg

For additional contact information
 Dr Gregory B Newby
 Chief Executive and Director
 gbnewbypglaforg


Section 4 Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenbergtm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment Many small donations
1 to 5000 are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit httppglaforg

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate

International donations are gratefully accepted but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States US laws alone swamp our small staff

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks online payments and credit card donations
To donate please visit httppglaforgdonate


Section 5 General Information About Project Gutenbergtm electronic
works

Professor Michael S Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenbergtm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone For thirty years he produced and distributed Project
Gutenbergtm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support


Project Gutenbergtm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included Thus we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility

 httpwwwgutenbergorg

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenbergtm
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation how to help produce our new eBooks and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks
